The grandiloquent truth of gestures on life's great occasions.   -Baudelaire.

The virtue of all-in wrestling is that it is the spectacle of excess.  Here we find grandiloquence which must have been that of the ancient theatres.   And in fact, wrestling is an open-air spectacle, for what makes the circus or the arena what they are is not the sky (a romantic value suited rather to fashionable occasions), it is the drenching and vertical quality of the flood of light.  Even hidden in the most squalid Parisian halls, wrestling partakes of the nature of the great solar spectacles, Greek drama and bullfights: in both, a light without shadow generates and emotion without reserve.

There are people who think that wrestling is an ignoble sport.   Wrestling is not a sport, it is a spectacle, and it is no more ignoble to attend a wrestled performance of Suffering than a performance of the sorrows of Arnolphe or Andromaque.*  Of course, there exists a false wrestling, in which the participants unnecessarily go to great lengths to make a show of a fair fight; this is of no interest.  True wrestling, wrongly called amateur wrestling, is performed in second-rate halls, where the public spontaneously attunes itself to the spectacular nature of the contest, like the audience at a suburban cinema.  Then these same people wax indignant because wrestling is a stage-managed sport (which ought, by the way, to mitigate its ignominy).  The public is completely uninterested in knowing whether the contest is rigged or not, and rightly so; it abandons itself to the primary virtue of the spectacle, which is to abolish all motives and all consequences: what matters is not what it thinks but what it sees.

This public knows very well the distinction between wrestling and boxing; it knows that boxing is a Jansenist sport, based on a demonstration of excellence.   One can bet one the outcome of a boxing match: with wrestling, it would make no sense.  A boxing-match is a story which is constructed before the eyes of the spectator; in wrestling, on the contrary, it is each moment that is intelligible, not the passage of time.  The spectator is not interested in the rise and fall of fortunes; he expects the transient image of certain passions.  Wrestling therefore demands an immediate reading of the juxtaposed meanings, so that there is no need to connect them.  The logical conclusion of the contest does not interest the wrestling-fan; while on the contrary a boxing-match always implies a science of the future.  In other words; wrestling is the sum of spectacles, of which no single one is a function: each moment imposes the total knowledge of a passion which rises erect and alone, without ever extending to the crowning moment of a result. 

Thus the function of the wrestler is not to win; it is to go exactly through the motions which are expected of him.  It is said that judo contains a hidden symbolic aspect; even in the midst of efficiency, its gestures are measured, precise, but restricted, drawn accurately but by a stroke without volume.  Wrestling, on the contrary, offers excessive gestures, exploited to the limit of their meaning.   In judo, a man who is down is hardly down at all, he rolls over, he draws back, he eludes defeat, or, if the latter is obvious, he immediately disappears; in wrestling, a man who is down is exaggeratedly so, and completely fills the eyes of the spectators with the intolerable spectacle of his powerlessness. 

This function of grandiloquence is indeed the same as that of ancient theatre, whose principle, language and props (masks and buskins) concurred in the exaggeratedly visible explanation of a Necessity.  The gesture of the vanquished wrestler signifying to the world a defeat which, far from disguising, he emphasizes and holds like a pause in music, corresponds to the mask of antiquity meant to signify the tragic mode of the spectacle.   In wrestling, as on the stage in antiquity, one is not ashamed of one's suffering, one knows how to cry, one has a liking for tears. 

Each sign in wrestling is therefore endowed with an absolute clarity, since one must always understand everything on the spot.  As soon as the adversaries are in the ring, the public is overwhelmed with the obviousness of the roles.  As in the theatre, each physical type expresses to excess the part which has been assigned to the contestant.  Thauvin, a fifty-year-old with an obese and sagging body, whose type of asexual hideousness always inspires feminine nicknames, displays in his flesh the characters of baseness, for his part is to represent what, in the classical concept of the salaud the 'bastard' (the key concept of any wrestling match), appears as organically repugnant. 


...

But what wrestling is above all meant to portray is a purely moral concept: that of justice.  The idea of 'paying' is essential to wrestling, and the crowd's 'Give it to him' means above all else 'Make him pay'.  This is therefore, needless to say, an immanent justice.  The baser the action of the 'bastard', the more delighted the public is by the blow which he justly receives in return.   If the villain, who is of course a coward - takes refuge behind the ropes, claiming unfairly to have a right to do so by a brazen mimicry, he is inexorably pursued there and caught, and the crowd is jubilant at seeing the rules broken for the sake of a deserved punishment.  Wrestlers know very well how to play up to the capacity for indignation of the public by presenting the very limit of the concept of Justice, this outermost zone of confrontation where it is enough to infringe the rules a little more to open the gates of a world without restraints.  For a wrestling-fan, nothing is finer than the revengeful fury of a a betrayed fighter who throws himself vehemently not on a successful opponent but on a smarting image of foul play.  Naturally, it is the pattern of Justice which matters here, much more than its content:   wrestling is above all a quantitative sequence of compensations (an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth).  This explains why sudden changes of circumstances have in the eyes of wrestling habitues a sort of moral beauty: they enjoy them as they would enjoy an inspired episode in a novel, and the greater the contrast between the success of a move and the reversal of fortune, the nearer the good luck of a contestant to his downfall, the more satisfying the dramatic mime is felt to be.  Justice is therefore the embodiment of a possible transgression; it is from the fact there is a Law that the spectacle of the passions which infringe in derives its value.

It is therefore easy to understand why out of five wrestling-matches, only about one is fair.  One must realize, let it be repeated, that 'fairness' here is a role or a genre, as in the theatre: the rules do not at all constitute a real constraint; they are the conventional appearance of fairness.  So that in actual fact a fair fight is nothing but an exaggeratedly polite one: the contestants confront each other with zeal, not rage; they can remain in control of their passions, they do not punish their beaten opponents relentlessly, they stop fighting as soon as they are ordered to do so, and congratulate each other at the end of a particularly arduous episode, during which, however, they have not ceased to be fair.  One must of course understand here that all these polite actions are brought to the notice of the public by the most conventional gestures of fairness: shaking hands, raising the arms, ostensibly avoiding a fruitless hold which would detract from the perfection of the contest.

Conversely, foul play exists only in its excessive signs: administering a big kick to one's beaten opponent, taking refuge behind the ropes while ostensibly invoking a purely formal right, refusing to shake hands with one's opponent before or after the right, taking advantage of the end of the round to rush treacherously at the adversary from behind, fouling him while the referee is not looking (a move which obviously only has any value or function because in fact half the audience can see it and get indignant about it)  Since Evil is the natural climate of wrestling, a fair fight has chiefly the value of being an exception.  It surprises the aficionado, who greets it when he sees it as an anachronism and a rather sentimental throwback to the sporting tradition (*Aren't they playing fair, those two"); he feels suddenly moved at the sight of the general kindness of the world, but would probably die of boredom and indifference if wrestlers did not quickly return to the orgy of evil which alone makes good wrestling. 

Extrapolated, fair wrestling could lead only to boxing or judo, whereas true wrestling derives its originality from all the excesses which make it a spectacle and not a sport.  The ending of a boxing-match or a judo-contest is abrupt, like the full-stop which closes a demonstration.  The rhythm of wrestling is quite different, for its natural meaning is that of rhetorical amplification: the emotional magniloquence, the repeated paroxysms, the exasperation of the retorts can only find their natural outcome in the most baroque confusion.  Some fights, among the most successful kind, are crowned by a final charivari [headache], a sort of unrestrained fantasia where the rules, the laws of the genre, the referee's censuring and the limits of the ring are abolished, swept away by a triumphant disorder which overflows into the hall and carries off pell-mell [in a hurried confusion] wrestlers, seconds, referee and spectators. 

It has already been noted that in America wrestling represents a sort of mythological fight between Good and Evil (of a quasi-political nature, the 'bad' wrestler always being supposed to be a Red).  The process of creating heroes in French wrestling is very different, being based on ethics and not on politics.  What the public is looking for here is the gradual construction of a highly moral image: that of the perfect 'bastard'.  One comes to wrestling in order to attend the continuing adventures of a single major leading character, permanent and multiform like Punch or Scapino, inventive in unexpected figures and yet always faithful to his role.  The 'bastard' is here revealed as a Moliere character or a 'portrait' by La Bruyere, that is to say as a classical entity, an essence, whose acts are only significant epiphenomena (a secondary phenomenon) arranged in time.  This stylized character does not belong to any particular nation or party, and whether the wrestler is called Kuzchenko (nicknamed Moustache after Stalin), Yerpazian, Gaspardi, Jo Vignola or Nollieres, the aficionado does not attribute to him any country except 'fairness' - observing the rules. 

What then is a 'bastard' for this audience composed in part, we are told, of people who are themselves outside the rules of society?  Essentially someone unstable, who accepts the rules only when they are useful to him and transgresses the formal continuity of attitudes.  He is unpredictable, therefore asocial.  He takes refuge behind the law when he considers that it is in his favor, and breaks it when he finds it useful to do so.  Sometimes he rejects the formal boundaries of the ring and goes on hitting an adversary legally protected by the ropes, sometimes he re-establishes these boundaries and claims the protection of what he did not respect a few minutes earlier.  This inconsistency, far more than treachery or cruelty, sends the audience beside itself with rage: offended not in its morality but in its logic, it considers the contradiction of argument as the basest of crimes. 

The forbidden move becomes dirty only when it destroys a quantitative equilibrium and disturbs the rigorous reckoning of compensations; what is condemned by the audience is not at all the transgression of insipid official rules, it is the lack of revenge, the absence of punishment.  So that there is nothing more exciting for a crowd than the grandiloquent kick given to a vanquished 'bastard'; the joy of punishing is at its climax when it is supported by a mathematical justification; contempt is then unrestrained.   One is no longer dealing with a salaud but with a salope - the verbal gesture of the ultimate degradation.  

Such a precise finality demands that wrestling should be exactly what the public expects of it.  Wrestlers, who are very experienced, know perfectly how to direct the spontaneous episodes of the fight so as to make them conform to the image which the public has of the great legendary themes of its mythology.  A wrestler can irritate or disgust, he never disappoints, for he always accomplishes completely, by a progressive solidification of signs, what the public expects of him.  In wrestling, nothing exists except in the absolute, there is no symbol, no allusion, everything is presented exhaustively.   Leaving  nothing in the shade, each action discards all parasitic meanings and ceremonially offers to the public a pure and full signification, rounded like Nature.  This grandiloquence is nothing but the popular and age-old image of the perfect intelligibility of reality.  What is portrayed by wrestling is therefore an ideal understanding of things; it is the euphoria of men raised for a while above the constitutive ambiguity of everyday situations and placed before the panoramic view of a univocal Nature, in which signs at last correspond to causes, without obstacle, without evasion, without contradiction.  (the same with a kind of pure disinterested aestheticism)

When the hero or the villain of the drama, the man who was seen a few minutes earlier possessed by moral rage, magnified into a sort of metaphysical sign, leaves the wrestling hall, impassive, anonymous, carrying a small suitcase and arm-in-arm with his wife, no one can doubt that wrestling holds that power of transmutation which is common to the Spectacle and to Religious Worship.  In the ring, and even in the depths of their voluntary ignominy, wrestlers remain gods because they are, for a few moments, the key which opens Nature, the pure gesture which ... Good from Evil, and unveils the form of a Justice which is at last intelligible. 


